On May 10, 1940, Winston Churchill became Prime Minister. When he 
met his Cabinet on May 13 he told them that "I have nothing to offer but
blood, toil, tears and sweat." He repeated that phrase later in the day
when he asked the House of Commons for a vote of confidence in his new 
all-party government. The response of Labour was heart-warming; the 
Conservative reaction was luke-warm. They still really wanted Neville 
Chamberlain. For the first time, the people had hope but Churchill 
commented to General Ismay: "Poor people, poor people. They trust me, 
and I can give them nothing but disaster for quite a long time." 
I beg to move, That this House welcomes the formation of a Government representing the 
united and inflexible resolve of the nation to prosecute the war with 
Germany to a victorious conclusion.On Friday evening last I 
received His Majesty's commission to form a new Administration. It as 
the evident wish and will of Parliament and the nation that this should 
be conceived on the broadest possible basis and that it should include 
all parties, both those who supported the late Government and also the 
parties of the Opposition. I have completed the most important part of 
this task. A War Cabinet has been formed of five Members, representing, 
with the Opposition Liberals, the unity of the nation. The three party 
Leaders have agreed to serve, either in the War Cabinet or in high 
executive office. The three Fighting Services have been filled. It was 
necessary that this should be done in one single day, on account of the 
extreme urgency and rigour of events. A number of other positions, key 
positions, were filled yesterday, and I am submitting a further list to 
His Majesty to-night. I hope to complete the appointment of the 
principal Ministers during to-morrow. the appointment of the other 
Ministers usually takes a little longer, but I trust that, when 
Parliament meets again, this part of my task will be completed, and that
 the administration will be complete in all respects.I 
considered it in the public interest to suggest that the House should be
 summoned to meet today. Mr. Speaker agreed, and took the necessary 
steps, in accordance with the powers conferred upon him by the 
Resolution of the House. At the end of the proceedings today, the 
Adjournment of the House will be proposed until Tuesday, 21st May, with,
 of course, provision for earlier meeting, if need be. The business to 
be considered during that week will be notified to Members at the 
earliest opportunity. I now invite the House, by the Motion which stands
 in my name, to record its approval of the steps taken and to declare 
its confidence in the new Government.To form an Administration 
of this scale and complexity is a serious undertaking in itself, but it 
must be remembered that we are in the preliminary stage of one of the 
greatest battles in history, that we are in action at many other points 
in Norway and in Holland, that we have to be prepared in the 
Mediterranean, that the air battle is continuous and that many 
preparations, such as have been indicated by my hon. Friend below the 
Gangway, have to be made here at home. In this crisis I hope I may be 
pardoned if I do not address the House at any length today. I hope that 
any of my friends and colleagues, or former colleagues, who are affected
 by the political reconstruction, will make allowance, all allowance, 
for any lack of ceremony with which it has been necessary to act. I 
would say to the House, as I said to those who have joined this 
government: "I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat."We
 have before us an ordeal of the most grievous kind. We have before us 
many, many long months of struggle and of suffering. You ask, what is 
our policy? I can say: It is to wage war, by sea, land and air, with all
 our might and with all the strength that God can give us; to wage war 
against a monstrous tyranny, never surpassed in the dark, lamentable 
catalogue of human crime. That is our policy. You ask, what is our aim? I
 can answer in one word: It is victory, victory at all costs, victory in
 spite of all terror, victory, however long and hard the road may be; 
for without victory, there is no survival. Let that be realised; no 
survival for the British Empire, no survival for all that the British 
Empire has stood for, no survival for the urge and impulse of the ages, 
that mankind will move forward towards its goal. But I take up my task 
with buoyancy and hope. I feel sure that our cause will not be suffered 
to fail among men. At this time I feel entitled to claim the aid of all,
 and I say, "come then, let us go forward together with our united 
strength".
We Shall Fight on the Beaches 
 June 4, 1940
 House of Commons
The position of the B. E.F had now become critical As a result of a 
most skillfully conducted retreat and German errors, the bulk of the 
British Forces reached the Dunkirk bridgehead. The peril facing the 
British nation was now suddenly and universally perceived. On May 26, 
"Operation Dynamo "the evacuation from Dunkirk began. The seas 
remained absolutely calm. The Royal Air Force bitterly maligned at the 
time by the Army,fought vehemently to deny the enemy the total air 
supremacy which would have wrecked the operation. At the outset, it was 
hoped that 45,000 men might be evacuated; in the event, over 338,000 
Allied troops reached England, including 26,000 French soldiers. On June
 4, Churchill reported to the House of Commons, seeking to check the 
mood of national euphoria and relief at the unexpected deliverance, and 
to make a clear appeal to the United States.From the moment
 that the French defenses at Sedan and on the Meuse were broken at the 
end of the second week of May, only a rapid retreat to Amiens and the 
south could have saved the British and French Armies who had entered 
Belgium at the appeal of the Belgian King; but this strategic fact was 
not immediately realized. The French High Command hoped they would be 
able to close the gap, and the Armies of the north were under their 
orders. Moreover, a retirement of this kind would have involved almost 
certainly the destruction of the fine Belgian Army of over 20 divisions 
and the abandonment of the whole of Belgium. Therefore, when the force 
and scope of the German penetration were realized and when a new French 
Generalissimo, General Weygand, assumed command in place of General 
Gamelin, an effort was made by the French and British Armies in Belgium 
to keep on holding the right hand of the Belgians and to give their own 
right hand to a newly created French Army which was to have advanced 
across the Somme in great strength to grasp it.However, the 
German eruption swept like a sharp scythe around the right and rear of 
the Armies of the north. Eight or nine armored divisions, each of about 
four hundred armored vehicles of different kinds, but carefully assorted
 to be complementary and divisible into small self-contained units, cut 
off all communications between us and the main French Armies. It severed
 our own communications for food and ammunition, which ran first to 
Amiens and afterwards through Abbeville, and it shore its way up the 
coast to Boulogne and Calais, and almost to Dunkirk. Behind this armored
 and mechanized onslaught came a number of German divisions in lorries, 
and behind them again there plodded comparatively slowly the dull brute 
mass of the ordinary German Army and German people, always so ready to 
be led to the trampling down in other lands of liberties and comforts 
which they have never known in their own.I have said this 
armored scythe-stroke almost reached Dunkirk-almost but not quite. 
Boulogne and Calais were the scenes of desperate fighting. The Guards 
defended Boulogne for a while and were then withdrawn by orders from 
this country. The Rifle Brigade, the 60th Rifles, and the Queen 
Victoria's Rifles, with a battalion of British tanks and 1,000 
Frenchmen, in all about four thousand strong, defended Calais to the 
last. The British Brigadier was given an hour to surrender. He spurned 
the offer, and four days of intense street fighting passed before 
silence reigned over Calais, which marked the end of a memorable 
resistance. Only 30 unwounded survivors were brought off by the Navy, 
and we do not know the fate of their comrades. Their sacrifice, however,
 was not in vain. At least two armored divisions, which otherwise would 
have been turned against the British Expeditionary Force, had to be sent
 to overcome them. They have added another page to the glories of the 
light divisions, and the time gained enabled the Graveline water lines 
to be flooded and to be held by the French troops.Thus it was 
that the port of Dunkirk was kept open. When it was found impossible for
 the Armies of the north to reopen their communications to Amiens with 
the main French Armies, only one choice remained. It seemed, indeed, 
forlorn. The Belgian, British and French Armies were almost surrounded. 
Their sole line of retreat was to a single port and to its neighboring 
beaches. They were pressed on every side by heavy attacks and far 
outnumbered in the air.When, a week ago today, I asked the House
 to fix this afternoon as the occasion for a statement, I feared it 
would be my hard lot to announce the greatest military disaster in our 
long history. I thought-and some good judges agreed with me-that perhaps
 20,000 or 30,000 men might be re-embarked. But it certainly seemed that
 the whole of the French First Army and the whole of the British 
Expeditionary Force north of the Amiens-Abbeville gap would be broken up
 in the open field or else would have to capitulate for lack of food and
 ammunition. These were the hard and heavy tidings for which I called 
upon the House and the nation to prepare themselves a week ago. The 
whole root and core and brain of the British Army, on which and around 
which we were to build, and are to build, the great British Armies in 
the later years of the war, seemed about to perish upon the field or to 
be led into an ignominious and starving captivity.That was the 
prospect a week ago. But another blow which might well have proved final
 was yet to fall upon us. The King of the Belgians had called upon us to
 come to his aid. Had not this Ruler and his Government severed 
themselves from the Allies, who rescued their country from extinction in
 the late war, and had they not sought refuge in what was proved to be a
 fatal neutrality, the French and British Armies might well at the 
outset have saved not only Belgium but perhaps even Poland. Yet at the 
last moment, when Belgium was already invaded, King Leopold called upon 
us to come to his aid, and even at the last moment we came. He and his 
brave, efficient Army, nearly half a million strong, guarded our left 
flank and thus kept open our only line of retreat to the sea. Suddenly, 
without prior consultation, with the least possible notice, without the 
advice of his Ministers and upon his own personal act, he sent a 
plenipotentiary to the German Command, surrendered his Army, and exposed
 our whole flank and means of retreat.I asked the House a week 
ago to suspend its judgment because the facts were not clear, but I do 
not feel that any reason now exists why we should not form our own 
opinions upon this pitiful episode. The surrender of the Belgian Army 
compelled the British at the shortest notice to cover a flank to the sea
 more than 30 miles in length. Otherwise all would have been cut off, 
and all would have shared the fate to which King Leopold had condemned 
the finest Army his country had ever formed. So in doing this and in 
exposing this flank, as anyone who followed the operations on the map 
will see, contact was lost between the British and two out of the three 
corps forming the First French Army, who were still farther from the 
coast than we were, and it seemed impossible that any large number of 
Allied troops could reach the coast.The enemy attacked on all 
sides with great strength and fierceness, and their main power, the 
power of their far more numerous Air Force, was thrown into the battle 
or else concentrated upon Dunkirk and the beaches. Pressing in upon the 
narrow exit, both from the east and from the west, the enemy began to 
fire with cannon upon the beaches by which alone the shipping could 
approach or depart. They sowed magnetic mines in the channels and seas; 
they sent repeated waves of hostile aircraft, sometimes more than a 
hundred strong in one formation, to cast their bombs upon the single 
pier that remained, and upon the sand dunes upon which the troops had 
their eyes for shelter. Their U-boats, one of which was sunk, and their 
motor launches took their toll of the vast traffic which now began. For 
four or five days an intense struggle reigned. All their armored 
divisions-or what Was left of them-together with great masses of 
infantry and artillery, hurled themselves in vain upon the 
ever-narrowing, ever-contracting appendix within which the British and 
French Armies fought.Meanwhile, the Royal Navy, with the willing
 help of countless merchant seamen, strained every nerve to embark the 
British and Allied troops; 220 light warships and 650 other vessels were
 engaged. They had to operate upon the difficult coast, often in adverse
 weather, under an almost ceaseless hail of bombs and an increasing 
concentration of artillery fire. Nor were the seas, as I have said, 
themselves free from mines and torpedoes. It was in conditions such as 
these that our men carried on, with little or no rest, for days and 
nights on end, making trip after trip across the dangerous waters, 
bringing with them always men whom they had rescued. The numbers they 
have brought back are the measure of their devotion and their courage. 
The hospital ships, which brought off many thousands of British and 
French wounded, being so plainly marked were a special target for Nazi 
bombs; but the men and women on board them never faltered in their duty.Meanwhile,
 the Royal Air Force, which had already been intervening in the battle, 
so far as its range would allow, from home bases, now used part of its 
main metropolitan fighter strength, and struck at the German bombers and
 at the fighters which in large numbers protected them. This struggle 
was protracted and fierce. Suddenly the scene has cleared, the crash and
 thunder has for the moment-but only for the moment-died away. A miracle
 of deliverance, achieved by valor, by perseverance, by perfect 
discipline, by faultless service, by resource, by skill, by 
unconquerable fidelity, is manifest to us all. The enemy was hurled back
 by the retreating British and French troops. He was so roughly handled 
that he did not hurry their departure seriously. The Royal Air Force 
engaged the main strength of the German Air Force, and inflicted upon 
them losses of at least four to one; and the Navy, using nearly 1,000 
ships of all kinds, carried over 335,000 men, French and British, out of
 the jaws of death and shame, to their native land and to the tasks 
which lie immediately ahead. We must be very careful not to assign to 
this deliverance the attributes of a victory. Wars are not won by 
evacuations. But there was a victory inside this deliverance, which 
should be noted. It was gained by the Air Force. Many of our soldiers 
coming back have not seen the Air Force at work; they saw only the 
bombers which escaped its protective attack. They underrate its 
achievements. I have heard much talk of this; that is why I go out of my
 way to say this. I will tell you about it.This was a great 
trial of strength between the British and German Air Forces. Can you 
conceive a greater objective for the Germans in the air than to make 
evacuation from these beaches impossible, and to sink all these ships 
which were displayed, almost to the extent of thousands? Could there 
have been an objective of greater military importance and significance 
for the whole purpose of the war than this? They tried hard, and they 
were beaten back; they were frustrated in their task. We got the Army 
away; and they have paid fourfold for any losses which they have 
inflicted. Very large formations of German aeroplanes-and we know that 
they are a very brave race-have turned on several occasions from the 
attack of one-quarter of their number of the Royal Air Force, and have 
dispersed in different directions. Twelve aeroplanes have been hunted by
 two. One aeroplane was driven into the water and cast away by the mere 
charge of a British aeroplane, which had no more ammunition. All of our 
types-the Hurricane, the Spitfire and the new Defiant-and all our pilots
 have been vindicated as superior to what they have at present to face.When
 we consider how much greater would be our advantage in defending the 
air above this Island against an overseas attack, I must say that I find
 in these facts a sure basis upon which practical and reassuring 
thoughts may rest. I will pay my tribute to these young airmen. The 
great French Army was very largely, for the time being, cast back and 
disturbed by the onrush of a few thousands of armored vehicles. May it 
not also be that the cause of civilization itself will be defended by 
the skill and devotion of a few thousand airmen? There never has been, I
 suppose, in all the world, in all the history of war, such an 
opportunity for youth. The Knights of the Round Table, the Crusaders, 
all fall back into the past-not only distant but prosaic; these young 
men, going forth every morn to guard their native land and all that we 
stand for, holding in their hands these instruments of colossal and 
shattering power, of whom it may be said thatEvery morn brought forth a noble chance
And every chance brought forth a noble knight,deserve our gratitude, 
as do all the brave men who, in so many ways and on so 
many occasions, are ready, and continue ready to give life and all for 
their native land.I return to the Army. In the long series of 
very fierce battles, now on this front, now on that, fighting on three 
fronts at once, battles fought by two or three divisions against an 
equal or somewhat larger number of the enemy, and fought fiercely on 
some of the old grounds that so many of us knew so well-in these battles
 our losses in men have exceeded 30,000 killed, wounded and missing. I 
take occasion to express the sympathy of the House to all who have 
suffered bereavement or who are still anxious. The President of the 
Board of Trade [Sir Andrew Duncan] is not here today. His son has been 
killed, and many in the House have felt the pangs of affliction in the 
sharpest form. But I will say this about the missing: We have had a 
large number of wounded come home safely to this country, but I would 
say about the missing that there may be very many reported missing who 
will come back home, some day, in one way or another. In the confusion 
of this fight it is inevitable that many have been left in positions 
where honor required no further resistance from them.Against 
this loss of over 30,000 men, we can set a far heavier loss certainly 
inflicted upon the enemy. But our losses in material are enormous. We 
have perhaps lost one-third of the men we lost in the opening days of 
the battle of 21st March, 1918, but we have lost nearly as many guns , 
nearly one thousand-and all our transport, all the armored vehicles that
 were with the Army in the north. This loss will impose a further delay 
on the expansion of our military strength. That expansion had not been 
proceeding as far as we had hoped. The best of all we had to give had 
gone to the British Expeditionary Force, and although they had not the 
numbers of tanks and some articles of equipment which were desirable, 
they were a very well and finely equipped Army. They had the 
first fruits of all that our industry had to give, and that is gone. And
 now here is this further delay. How long it will be, how long it will 
last, depends upon the exertions which we make in this Island. An effort
 the like of which has never been seen in our records is now being made.
 Work is proceeding everywhere, night and day, Sundays and week days. 
Capital and Labor have cast aside their interests, rights, and customs 
and put them into the common stock. Already the flow of munitions has 
leaped forward. There is no reason why we should not in a few months 
overtake the sudden and serious loss that has come upon us, without 
retarding the development of our general program.Nevertheless, 
our thankfulness at the escape of our Army and so many men, whose loved 
ones have passed through an agonizing week, must not blind us to the 
fact that what has happened in France and Belgium is a colossal military
 disaster. The French Army has been weakened, the Belgian Army has been 
lost, a large part of those fortified lines upon which so much faith had
 been reposed is gone, many valuable mining districts and factories have
 passed into the enemy's possession, the whole of the Channel ports are 
in his hands, with all the tragic consequences that follow from that, 
and we must expect another blow to be struck almost immediately at us or
 at France. We are told that Herr Hitler has a plan for invading the 
British Isles. This has often been thought of before. When Napoleon lay 
at Boulogne for a year with his flat-bottomed boats and his Grand Army, 
he was told by someone. "There are bitter weeds in England." There are 
certainly a great many more of them since the British Expeditionary 
Force returned.The whole question of home defense against 
invasion is, of course, powerfully affected by the fact that we have for
 the time being in this Island incomparably more powerful military 
forces than we have ever had at any moment in this war or the last. But 
this will not continue. We shall not be content with a defensive war. We
 have our duty to our Ally. We have to reconstitute and build up the 
British Expeditionary Force once again, under its gallant 
Commander-in-Chief, Lord Gort. All this is in train; but in the interval
 we must put our defenses in this Island into such a high state of 
organization that the fewest possible numbers will be required to give 
effective security and that the largest possible potential of offensive 
effort may be realized. On this we are now engaged. It will be very 
convenient, if it be the desire of the House, to enter upon this subject
 in a secret Session. Not that the government would necessarily be able 
to reveal in very great detail military secrets, but we like to have our
 discussions free, without the restraint imposed by the fact that they 
will be read the next day by the enemy; and the Government would benefit
 by views freely expressed in all parts of the House by Members with 
their knowledge of so many different parts of the country. I understand 
that some request is to be made upon this subject, which will be readily
 acceded to by His Majesty's Government.We have found it 
necessary to take measures of increasing stringency, not only against 
enemy aliens and suspicious characters of other nationalities, but also 
against British subjects who may become a danger or a nuisance should 
the war be transported to the United Kingdom. I know there are a great 
many people affected by the orders which we have made who are the 
passionate enemies of Nazi Germany. I am very sorry for them, but we 
cannot, at the present time and under the present stress, draw all the 
distinctions which we should like to do. If parachute landings were 
attempted and fierce fighting attendant upon them followed, these 
unfortunate people would be far better out of the way, for their own 
sakes as well as for ours. There is, however, another class, for which I
 feel not the slightest sympathy. Parliament has given us the powers to 
put down Fifth Column activities with a strong hand, and we shall use 
those powers subject to the supervision and correction of the House, 
without the slightest hesitation until we are satisfied, and more than 
satisfied, that this malignancy in our midst has been effectively 
stamped out.Turning once again, and this time more generally, to
 the question of invasion, I would observe that there has never been a 
period in all these long centuries of which we boast when an absolute 
guarantee against invasion, still less against serious raids, could have
 been given to our people. In the days of Napoleon the same wind which 
would have carried his transports across the Channel might have driven 
away the blockading fleet. There was always the chance, and it is that 
chance which has excited and befooled the imaginations of many 
Continental tyrants. Many are the tales that are told. We are assured 
that novel methods will be adopted, and when we see the originality of 
malice, the ingenuity of aggression, which our enemy displays, we may 
certainly prepare ourselves for every kind of novel stratagem and every 
kind of brutal and treacherous maneuver. I think that no idea is so 
outlandish that it should not be considered and viewed with a searching,
 but at the same time, I hope, with a steady eye. We must never forget 
the solid assurances of sea power and those which belong to air power if
 it can be locally exercised.I have, myself, full confidence 
that if all do their duty, if nothing is neglected, and if the best 
arrangements are made, as they are being made, we shall prove ourselves 
once again able to defend our Island home, to ride out the storm of war,
 and to outlive the menace of tyranny, if necessary for years, if 
necessary alone. At any rate, that is what we are going to try to do. 
That is the resolve of His Majesty's Government-every man of them. That 
is the will of Parliament and the nation. The British Empire and the 
French Republic, linked together in their cause and in their need, will 
defend to the death their native soil, aiding each other like good 
comrades to the utmost of their strength. Even though large tracts of 
Europe and many old and famous States have fallen or may fall into the 
grip of the Gestapo and all the odious apparatus of Nazi rule, we shall 
not flag or fail. We shall go on to the end, we shall fight in France, 
we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we shall fight with growing 
confidence and growing strength in the air, we shall defend our Island, 
whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight 
on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and in the streets,
 we shall fight in the hills; we shall never surrender, and even if, 
which I do not for a moment believe, this Island or a large part of it 
were subjugated and starving, then our Empire beyond the seas, armed and
 guarded by the British Fleet, would carry on the struggle, until, in 
God's good time, the New World, with all its power and might, steps 
forth to the rescue and the liberation of the old.
 The Few : August 20, 1940 : House of Commons On August 15, the crisis of the 
battle of Britain was reached. All the resources of Fighter Command in the South 
were used. The most difficult and dangerous period of the Battle of Britain was 
between August 24 and September 6, when the German attack was directed against 
the R.A.F airfields in the South of England with considerable success. In this 
speech Churchill coined the phrase "The Few" to describe the R.A.F fighter-pilots. 
The phrase stuck. The final sentence of this speech, including the use of the 
word "benignant," is a good example of Churchill's choice of unexpected and assertive 
adjectives to make a phrase memorable. 
Almost a year has passed since the war began, and it is natural for us, I think, 
to pause on our journey at this milestone and survey the dark, wide field. It is also 
useful to compare the first year of this second war against German aggression with its 
forerunner a quarter of a century ago. Although this war is in fact only a continuation 
of the last, very great differences in its character are apparent. In the last war millions
 of men fought by hurling enormous masses of steel at one another. "Men and shells" was the cry, 
and prodigious slaughter was the consequence.In this war nothing of this kind 
has yet appeared. It is a conflict of strategy, of organisation, of technical 
apparatus, of science, mechanics, and morale. The British casualties in the first 
12 months of the Great War amounted to 365,000. In this war, I am thankful to 
say, British killed, wounded, prisoners, and missing, including civilians, do 
not exceed 92,000, and of these a large proportion are alive as prisoners of war. 
Looking more widely around, one may say that throughout all Europe for one man 
killed or wounded in the first year perhaps five were killed or wounded in 1914-15.The 
slaughter is only a small fraction, but the consequences to the belligerents have 
been even more deadly. We have seen great countries with powerful armies dashed 
out of coherent existence in a few weeks. We have seen the French Republic and 
the renowned French Army beaten into complete and total submission with less than 
the casualties which they suffered in any one of half a dozen of the battles of 
1914-18.The entire body - it might almost seem at times the soul - of France has 
succumbed to physical effects incomparably less terrible than those which were 
sustained with fortitude and undaunted will power 25 years ago. Although up to 
the present the loss of life has been mercifully diminished, the decisions reached 
in the course of the struggle are even more profound upon the fate of nations 
than anything that has ever happened since barbaric times. Moves are made upon 
the scientific and strategic boards, advantages are gained by mechanical means, 
as a result of which scores of millions of men become incapable of further resistance, 
or judge themselves incapable of further resistance, and a fearful game of chess 
proceeds from check to mate by which the unhappy players seem to be inexorably 
bound.There is another more obvious difference from 1914. The whole of the warring 
nations are engaged, not only soldiers, but the entire population, men, women, 
and children. The fronts are everywhere. The trenches are dug in the towns and 
streets. Every village is fortified. Every road is barred. The front line runs 
through the factories. The workmen are soldiers with different weapons but the 
same courage. These are great and distinctive changes from what many of us saw 
in the struggle of a quarter of a century ago.There seems to be every reason to 
believe that this new kind of war is well suited to the genius and the resources 
of the British nation and the British Empire and that, once we get properly equipped 
and properly started, a war of this kind will be more favourable to us than the 
sombre mass slaughters of the Somme and Passchendaele. If it is a case of the 
whole nation fighting and suffering together, that ought to suit us, because we 
are the most united of all the nations, because we entered the war upon the national 
will and with our eyes open, and because we have been nurtured in freedom and 
individual responsibility and are the products, not of totalitarian uniformity 
but of tolerance and variety.If all these qualities are turned, as they are being 
turned, to the arts of war, we may be able to show the enemy quite a lot of things 
that they have not thought of yet. Since the Germans drove the Jews out and lowered 
their technical standards, our science is definitely ahead of theirs. Our geographical 
position, the command of the sea, and the friendship of the United States enable 
us to draw resources from the whole world and to manufacture weapons of war of 
every kind, but especially of the superfine kinds, on a scale hitherto practised 
only by Nazi Germany.Hitler is now sprawled over Europe. Our offensive springs 
are being slowly compressed, and we must resolutely and methodically prepare ourselves 
for the campaigns of 1941 and 1942. Two or three years are not a long time, even 
in our short, precarious lives. They are nothing in the history of the nation, 
and when we are doing the finest thing in the world, and have the honour to be 
the sole champion of the liberties of all Europe, we must not grudge these years 
of weary as we toil and struggle through them. It does not follow that our energies 
in future years will be exclusively confined to defending ourselves and our possessions. 
Many opportunities may lie open to amphibious power, and we must be ready to take 
advantage of them.One of the ways to bring this war to a speedy end is to convince 
the enemy, not by words, but by deeds, that we have both the will and the means, 
not only to go on indefinitely but to strike heavy and unexpected blows. The road 
to victory may not be so long as we expect. But we have no right to count upon 
this. Be it long or short, rough or smooth, we mean to reach our journey's end.It 
is our intention to maintain and enforce a strict blockade not only of Germany 
but of Italy, France, and all the other countries that have fallen into the German 
power. I read in the papers that Herr Hitler has also proclaimed a strict blockade 
of the British Islands. No one can complain of that. I remember the Kaiser doing 
it in the last war. What indeed would be a matter of general complaint would be 
if we were to prolong the agony of all Europe by allowing food to come in to nourish 
the Nazis and aid their war effort, or to allow food to go in to the subjugated 
peoples, which certainly would be pillaged off them by their Nazi conquerors.There 
have been many proposals, founded on the highest motives, that food should be 
allowed to pass the blockade for the relief of these populations. I regret that 
we must refuse these requests. The Nazis declare that they have created a new 
unified economy in Europe. They have repeatedly stated that they possess ample 
reserves of food and that they can feed their captive peoples.In a German broadcast 
of 27th June it was said that while Mr. Hoover's plan for relieving France, Belgium, 
and Holland deserved commendation, the German forces had already taken the necessary 
steps. We know that in Norway when the German troops went in, there were food 
supplies to last for a year. We know that Poland, though not a rich country, usually 
produces sufficient food for her people. Moreover, the other countries which Herr 
Hitler has invaded all held considerable stocks when the Germans entered and are 
themselves, in many cases, very substantial food producers. If all this food is 
not available now, it can only be because it has been removed to feed the people 
of Germany and to give them increased rations - for a change - during the last 
few months.At this season of the year and for some months to come, there is the 
least chance of scarcity as the harvest has just been gathered in. The only agencies 
which can create famine in any part of Europe now and during the coming winter, 
will be German exactions or German failure to distribute the supplies which they 
command.There is another aspect. Many of the most valuable foods are essential 
to the manufacture of vital war material. Fats are used to make explosives. Potatoes 
make the alcohol for motor spirit. The plastic materials now so largely used in 
the construction of aircraft are made of milk. If the Germans use these commodities 
to help them to bomb our women and children, rather than to feed the populations 
who produce them, we may be sure that imported foods would go the same way, directly 
or indirectly, or be employed to relieve the enemy of the responsibilities he 
has so wantonly assumed.Let Hitler bear his responsibilities to the full and let 
the peoples of Europe who groan beneath his yoke aid in every way the coming of 
the day when that yoke will be broken. Meanwhile, we can and we will arrange in 
advance for the speedy entry of food into any part of the enslaved area, when 
this part has been wholly cleared of German forces, and has genuinely regained 
its freedom. We shall do our best to encourage the building up of reserves of 
food all over the world, so that there will always be held up before the eyes 
of the peoples of Europe, including - I say deliberately - the German and Austrian 
peoples, the certainty that the shattering of the Nazi power will bring to them 
all immediate food, freedom and peace.Rather more than a quarter of a year has 
passed since the new Government came into power in this country. What a cataract 
of disaster has poured out upon us since then. The trustful Dutch overwhelmed; 
their beloved and respected Sovereign driven into exile; the peaceful city of 
Rotterdam the scene of a massacre as hideous and brutal as anything in the Thirty 
Years' War. Belgium invaded and beaten down; our own fine Expeditionary Force, 
which King Leopold called to his rescue, cut off and almost captured, escaping 
as it seemed only by a miracle and with the loss of all its equipment; our Ally, 
France, out; Italy in against us; all France in the power of the enemy, all its 
arsenals and vast masses of military material converted or convertible to the 
enemy's use; a puppet Government set up at Vichy which may at any moment be forced 
to become our foe; the whole Western seaboard of Europe from the North Cape to 
the Spanish frontier in German hands; all the ports, all the air-fields on this 
immense front, employed against us as potential springboards of invasion.&nbsp; 
Moreover, the German air power, numerically so far outstripping ours, has been 
brought so close to our Island that what we used to dread greatly has come to 
pass and the hostile bombers not only reach our shores in a few minutes and from 
many directions, but can be escorted by their fighting aircraft.Why, Sir, if we 
had been confronted at the beginning of May with such a prospect, it would have 
seemed incredible that at the end of a period of horror and disaster, or at this 
point in a period of horror and disaster, we should stand erect, sure of ourselves, 
masters of our fate and with the conviction of final victory burning unquenchable 
in our hearts. Few would have believed we could survive; none would have believed 
that we should to-day not only feel stronger but should actually be stronger than 
we have ever been before.Let us see what has happened on the other side of the 
scales. The British nation and the British Empire finding themselves alone, stood 
undismayed against disaster. No one flinched or wavered; nay, some who formerly 
thought of peace, now think only of war. Our people are united and resolved, as 
they have never been before. Death and ruin have become small things compared 
with the shame of defeat or failure in duty.We cannot tell what lies ahead. It 
may be that even greater ordeals lie before us. We shall face whatever is coming 
to us. We are sure of ourselves and of our cause and that is the supreme fact 
which has emerged in these months of trial.Meanwhile, we have not only fortified 
our hearts but our Island. We have rearmed and rebuilt our armies in a degree 
which would have been deemed impossible a few months ago. We have ferried across 
the Atlantic, in the month of July, thanks to our friends over there, an immense 
mass of munitions of all kinds, cannon, rifles, machine-guns, cartridges, and 
shell, all safely landed without the loss of a gun or a round. The output of our 
own factories, working as they have never worked before, has poured forth to the 
troops. The whole British Army is at home. More than 2,000,000 determined men 
have rifles and bayonets in their hands to-night and three-quarters of them are 
in regular military formations. We have never had armies like this in our Island 
in time of war. The whole Island bristles against invaders, from the sea or from 
the air.As I explained to the House in the middle of June, the stronger our Army 
at home, the larger must the invading expedition be, and the larger the invading 
expedition, the less difficult will be the task of the Navy in detecting its assembly 
and in intercepting and destroying it on passage; and the greater also would be 
the difficulty of feeding and supplying the invaders if ever they landed, in the 
teeth of continuous naval and air attack on their communications. All this is 
classical and venerable doctrine. As in Nelson's day, the maxim holds, "Our first 
line of defence is the enemy's ports." Now air reconnaissance and photography 
have brought to an old principle a new and potent aid.Our Navy is far stronger 
than it was at the beginning of the war. The great flow of new construction set 
on foot at the outbreak is now beginning to come in. We hope our friends across 
the ocean will send us a timely reinforcement to bridge the gap between the peace 
flotillas of 1939 and the war flotillas of 1941. There is no difficulty in sending 
such aid. The seas and oceans are open. The U-boats are contained. The magnetic 
mine is, up to the present time, effectively mastered. The merchant tonnage under 
the British flag, after a year of unlimited U-boat war, after eight months of 
intensive mining attack, is larger than when we began. We have, in addition, under 
our control at least 4,000,000 tons of shipping from the captive countries which 
has taken refuge here or in the harbours of the Empire. Our stocks of food of 
all kinds are far more abundant than in the days of peace and a large and growing 
programme of food production is on foot.Why do I say all this? Not assuredly to 
boast; not assuredly to give the slightest countenance to complacency. The dangers 
we face are still enormous, but so are our advantages and resources.I recount 
them because the people have a right to know that there are solid grounds for 
the confidence which we feel, and that we have good reason to believe ourselves 
capable, as I said in a very dark hour two months ago, of continuing the war "if 
necessary alone, if necessary for years." I say it also because the fact that 
the British Empire stands invincible, and that Nazidom is still being resisted, 
will kindle again the spark of hope in the breasts of hundreds of millions of 
downtrodden or despairing men and women throughout Europe, and far beyond its 
bounds, and that from these sparks there will presently come cleansing and devouring 
flame.The great air battle which has been in progress over this Island for the 
last few weeks has recently attained a high intensity. It is too soon to attempt 
to assign limits either to its scale or to its duration. We must certainly expect 
that greater efforts will be made by the enemy than any he has so far put forth. 
Hostile air fields are still being developed in France and the Low Countries, 
and the movement of squadrons and material for attacking us is still proceeding.It 
is quite plain that Herr Hitler could not admit defeat in his air attack on Great 
Britain without sustaining most serious injury. If, after all his boastings and 
blood-curdling threats and lurid accounts trumpeted round the world of the damage 
he has inflicted, of the vast numbers of our Air Force he has shot down, so he 
says, with so little loss to himself; if after tales of the panic-stricken British 
crushed in their holes cursing the plutocratic Parliament which has led them to 
such a plight; if after all this his whole air onslaught were forced after a while 
tamely to peter out, the Fuehrer's reputation for veracity of statement might 
be seriously impugned. We may be sure, therefore, that he will continue as long 
as he has the strength to do so, and as long as any preoccupations he may have 
in respect of the Russian Air Force allow him to do so.On the other hand, the 
conditions and course of the fighting have so far been favourable to us. I told 
the House two months ago that whereas in France our fighter aircraft were wont 
to inflict a loss of two or three to one upon the Germans, and in the fighting 
at Dunkirk, which was a kind of no-man's-land, a loss of about three or four to 
one, we expected that in an attack on this Island we should achieve a larger ratio. 
This has certainly come true. It must also be remembered that all the enemy machines 
and pilots which are shot down over our Island, or over the seas which surround 
it, are either destroyed or captured; whereas a considerable proportion of our 
machines, and also of our pilots, are saved, and soon again in many cases come 
into action.A vast and admirable system of salvage, directed by the Ministry of 
Aircraft Production, ensures the speediest return to the fighting line of damaged 
machines, and the most provident and speedy use of all the spare parts and material. 
At the same time the splendid, nay, astounding increase in the output and repair 
of British aircraft and engines which Lord Beaverbrook has achieved by a genius 
of organisation and drive, which looks like magic, has given us overflowing reserves 
of every type of aircraft, and an ever-mounting stream of production both in quantity 
and quality.The enemy is, of course, far more numerous than we are. But our new 
production already, as I am advised, largely exceeds his, and the American production 
is only just beginning to flow in. It is a fact, as I see from my daily returns, 
that our bomber and fighter strength now, after all this fighting, are larger 
than they have ever been. We believe that we shall be able to continue the air 
struggle indefinitely and as long as the enemy pleases, and the longer it continues 
the more rapid will be our approach, first towards that parity, and then into 
that superiority in the air, upon which in a large measure the decision of the 
war depends.The gratitude of every home in our Island, in our Empire, and indeed 
throughout the world, except in the abodes of the guilty, goes out to the British 
airmen who, undaunted by odds, unwearied in their constant challenge and mortal 
danger, are turning the tide of the world war by their prowess and by their devotion. 
Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few.All 
hearts go out to the fighter pilots, whose brilliant actions we see with our own 
eyes day after day; but we must never forget that all the time, night after night, 
month after month, our bomber squadrons travel far into Germany, find their targets 
in the darkness by the highest navigational skill, aim their attacks, often under 
the heaviest fire, often with serious loss, with deliberate careful discrimination, 
and inflict shattering blows upon the whole of the technical and war-making structure 
of the Nazi power. On no part of the Royal Air Force does the weight of the war 
fall more heavily than on the daylight bombers who will play an invaluable part 
in the case of invasion and whose unflinching zeal it has been necessary in the 
meanwhile on numerous occasions to restrain.We are able to verify the results 
of bombing military targets in Germany, not only by reports which reach us through 
many sources, but also, of course, by photography. I have no hesitation in saying 
that this process of bombing the military industries and communications of Germany 
and the air bases and storage depots from which we are attacked, which process 
will continue upon an ever-increasing scale until the end of the war, and may 
in another year attain dimensions hitherto undreamed of, affords one at least 
of the most certain, if not the shortest of all the roads to victory. Even if 
the Nazi legions stood triumphant on the Black Sea, or indeed upon the Caspian, 
even if Hitler was at the gates of India, it would profit him nothing if at the 
same time the entire economic and scientific apparatus of German war power lay 
shattered and pulverised at home.The fact that the invasion of this Island upon 
a large scale has become a far more difficult operation with every week that has 
passed since we saved our Army at Dunkirk, and our very great preponderance of 
sea-power enable us to turn our eyes and to turn our strength increasingly towards 
the Mediterranean and against that other enemy who, without the slightest provocation, 
coldly and deliberately, for greed and gain, stabbed France in the back in the 
moment of her agony, and is now marching against us in Africa.The defection of 
France has, of course, been deeply damaging to our position in what is called, 
somewhat oddly, the Middle East. In the defence of Somaliland, for instance, we 
had counted upon strong French forces attacking the Italians from Jibuti. We had 
counted also upon the use of the French naval and air bases in the Mediterranean, 
and particularly upon the North African shore. We had counted upon the French 
Fleet. Even though metropolitan France was temporarily overrun, there was no reason 
why the French Navy, substantial parts of the French Army, the French Air Force 
and the French Empire overseas should not have continued the struggle at our side.Shielded 
by overwhelming sea-power, possessed of invaluable strategic bases and of ample 
funds, France might have remained one of the great combatants in the struggle. 
By so doing, France would have preserved the continuity of her life, and the French 
Empire might have advanced with the British Empire to the rescue of the independence 
and integrity of the French Motherland.In our own case, if we had been put in 
the terrible position of France, a contingency now happily impossible, although, 
of course, it would have been the duty of all war leaders to fight on here to 
the end, it would also have been their duty, as I indicated in my speech of 4th 
June, to provide as far as possible for the Naval security of Canada and our Dominions 
and to make sure they had the means to carry the struggle from beyond the oceans. 
Most of the other countries that have been overrun by Germany for the time being 
have preserved valiantly and faithfully. The Czechs, the Poles, the Norwegians, 
the Dutch, the Belgians are still in the field, sword in hand, recognised by Great 
Britain and the United States as the sole representative authorities and lawful 
Governments of their respective States.That France alone should lie prostrate 
at this moment, is the crime, not of a great and noble nation, but of what are 
called "the men of Vichy." We have profound sympathy with the French people. Our 
old comradeship with France is not dead. In General de Gaulle and his gallant 
band, that comradeship takes an effective form. These free Frenchmen have been 
condemned to death by Vichy, but the day will come, as surely as the sun will 
rise to-morrow, when their names will be held in honour, and their names will 
be graven in stone in the streets and villages of a France restored in a liberated 
Europe to its full freedom and its ancient fame.But this conviction which I feel 
of the future cannot affect the immediate problems which confront us in the Mediterranean 
and in Africa. It had been decided some time before the beginning of the war not 
to defend the Protectorate of Somaliland. That policy was changed when the French 
gave in, and when our small forces there, a few battalions, a few guns, were attacked 
by all the Italian troops, nearly two divisions, which had formerly faced the 
French at Jibuti, it was right to withdraw our detachments, virtually intact, 
for action elsewhere. Far larger operations no doubt impend in the Middle East 
theatre, and I shall certainly not attempt to discuss or prophesy about their 
probable course. We have large armies and many means of reinforcing them. We have 
the complete sea command of the Eastern Mediterranean. We intend to do our best 
to give a good account of ourselves, and to discharge faithfully and resolutely 
all our obligations and duties in that quarter of the world. More than that I 
do not think the House would wish me to say at the present time.A good many people 
have written to me to ask me to make on this occasion a fuller statement of our 
war aims, and of the kind of peace we wish to make after the war, than is contained 
in the very considerable declaration which was made early in the Autumn. Since 
then we have made common cause with Norway, Holland, and Belgium. We have recognised 
the Czech Government of Dr. Benes, and we have told General de Gaulle that our 
success will carry with it the restoration of France.I do not think it would be 
wise at this moment, while the battle rages and the war is still perhaps only 
in its earlier stage, to embark upon elaborate speculations about the future shape 
which should be given to Europe or the new securities which must be arranged to 
spare mankind the miseries of a third World War. The ground is not new, it has 
been frequently traversed and explored, and many ideas are held about it in common 
by all good men, and all free men. But before we can undertake the task of rebuilding 
we have not only to be convinced ourselves, but we have to convince all other 
countries that the Nazi tyranny is going to be finally broken.The right to guide 
the course of world history is the noblest prize of victory. We are still toiling 
up the hill; we have not yet reached the crest-line of it; we cannot survey the 
landscape or even imagine what its condition will be when that longed-for morning 
comes. The task which lies before us immediately is at once more practical, more 
simple and more stern. I hope - indeed I pray - that we shall not be found unworthy 
of our victory if after toil and tribulation it is granted to us. For the rest, 
we have to gain the victory. That is our task.There is, however, one direction 
in which we can see a little more clearly ahead. We have to think not only for 
ourselves but for the lasting security of the cause and principles for which we 
are fighting and of the long future of the British Commonwealth of Nations.Some 
months ago we came to the conclusion that the interests of the United States and 
of the British Empire both required that the United States should have facilities 
for the naval and air defence of the Western hemisphere against the attack of 
a Nazi power which might have acquired temporary but lengthy control of a large 
part of Western Europe and its formidable resources.We had therefore decided spontaneously, 
and without being asked or offered any inducement, to inform the Government of 
the United States that we would be glad to place such defence facilities at their 
disposal by leasing suitable sites in our Transatlantic possessions for their 
greater security against the unmeasured dangers of the future.The principle of 
association of interests for common purposes between Great Britain and the United 
States had developed even before the war. Various agreements had been reached 
about certain small islands in the Pacific Ocean which had become important as 
air fuelling points. In all this line of thought we found ourselves in very close 
harmony with the Government of Canada.Presently we learned that anxiety was also 
felt in the United States about the air and naval defence of their Atlantic seaboard, 
and President Roosevelt has recently made it clear that he would like to discuss 
with us, and with the Dominion of Canada and with Newfoundland, the development 
of American naval and air facilities in Newfoundland and in the West Indies. There 
is, of course, no question of any transference of sovereignty - that has never 
been suggested - or of any action being taken, without the consent or against 
the wishes of the various Colonies concerned, but for our part, His Majesty's 
Government are entirely willing to accord defence facilities to the United States 
on a 99 years' leasehold basis, and we feel sure that our interests no less than 
theirs, and the interests of the Colonies themselves and of Canada and Newfoundland 
will be served thereby.These are important steps. Undoubtedly this process means 
that these two great organisations of the English-speaking democracies, the British 
Empire and the United States, will have to be somewhat mixed up together in some 
of their affairs for mutual and general advantage. For my own part, looking out 
upon the future, I do not view the process with any misgivings. I could not stop 
it if I wished; no one can stop it. Like the Mississippi, it just keeps rolling 
along. Let it roll. Let it roll on full flood, inexorable, irresistible, benignant, 
to broader lands and better days. 


